Hello again.
In this video, we're going to continue our overview of modern C++.
We are going to finish off move semantics.
We saw in the previous video that you can have a function which takes an argument by value, if that's
passed as an lvalue, then the argument will be copied.
If it's passed as an rvalue, then the argument will be moved.
So in effect, we have one function, which takes two different types of arguments, but it behaves
the same way.
It's also possible to have two separate functions which behave differently, depending on how the argument
was passed.
And this is possible in C++ due to overloading of functions.
We can have one function, which takes an lvalue reference which will copy its argument, and an overloaded
function which will take an rvalue reference and move its argument.
So let's look at this.
So I've got a function here which takes an lvalue, a reference to const lvalue, and a function which
takes an rvalue reference.
I am going to call them with different arguments.
First I am going to call it with the lvalue, then with an lvalue that is cast to rvalue reference and
then with an rvalue.
So let's see how this works.
So when we call this with y, the version that takes the lvalue reference is called. When we pass it with
y cast to rvalue then the rvalue reference version is called.
And when we pass it with a literal, the rvalue reference is called.
So we have these overloaded functions and the one which gets called depends on how we pass the arguments.
When move semantics were first added to C++, they were just meant to be a form of optimization, but
it quickly became obvious they could also be used to embody the concept of ownership.
If we look at these two overloads a bit more closely,
the one which takes an lvalue takes a reference to const, so this function can inspect the object.
It can call the public member functions if they are const and it can access the values of any public
data members, but not change them.
The argument is an lvalue, which means it has an address in memory defined somewhere in the program.
So in a way, you can think of that as being owned by someone.
On the other hand, the rvalue does not have any address. The object has been moved into this function,
so this function can do whatever it likes and it won't affect anyone else.
So you can think of the function as becoming the owner of this object.
An rvalue corresponds to something that is not owned by anyone. If it's a literal or a temporary object,
then it lives in memory which is managed by the compiler, which is outside of the control of the
program.
On the other hand, if it is an lvalue and we have called on it, then that means it no longer really
exists for the owner.
I mean, it's still there, but as a kind of shell of an object.
In all these cases, the function now becomes the owner of the object, so you can think of the ownership
as being transferred to this function.
C++ has some library types which cannot be copied but can be moved. One of these, which you probably
all know is fstream.
Another one is unique underscore ptr.
This is a smart pointer which was introduced in C++. We don't actually need it in this course,
so I am not going to talk about it.
And there are also some classes used in multithreading which we will meet later on in this course.
These types own a resource: the file stream owns a file pointer.
Typically, the unique_ptr owns some allocated memory. The way these work are that the objects will acquire
ownership of the resource in the constructor: the fstream will open the file,
the unique pointer will allocate the memory.
And then in the destructor, the object will release ownership: the file would be closed or the memory
will be released.
Only one object can own a given resource at a time, so only one unique_ptr can own some allocated
memory, only one file stream
can have a particular instance of an open file.
So that's why these objects can't be copied.
Because if you copy it, you have two objects which own the same resource and that is not going to work.
However, it is possible to transfer the ownership from one object to another, and we can do that by
moving the resource.
So the resource is just held as a data member and that data can be moved just like any other data member.
If we work through this with fstream, fstream has a data member, which is a file pointer or some sort of file
object.
The fstream constructor will open some file, which is given as an argument to the constructor.
There are some other ways, but this is the most relevant to this discussion. And then the destructor
will close the file.
An fstream object cannot be copied, but it can be moved.
This will cause the file object to be transferred from the source object to the new copy.
The source object will give up its ownership of the file object and it will be left empty.
The target object will take ownership of the file object, and it's going to be responsible for managing
its lifetime.
And then when the target object is destroyed, the file is closed.
C++ has had copy and assignment operators for a long time. These are needed in case an object needs
to do anything special when you are copying it or assigning to it.
In C++11, there are two new member functions which do the same when you are moving an object.
So we now have a move constructor, which is like the copy constructor, but it does a move [operation].
And the move assignment operator, which is like the assignment operator, or as it is now known, the copy
assignment operator, but it does a move [operation].
The prototypes look a bit different. You might expect that they would have a double ampersand instead of
a single ampersand because they're going to be taking an rvalue to move from.
These are not made const because the object is going to be moved from, it's going to be modified,
so it can't be const and we also use this noexcept key word.
This is another new feature in C++ 11. It means that the function promises it is not going to throw
an exception or call any other functions that might throw an exception.
In C++ 98, there was throw with an empty bracket which did the same thing.
There was also throw with arguments in which is now being dropped.
So finally, we can find out what the special property is, that classes have to have to be moved.
In traditional C++, when we have an argument, it's always copied.
So this slide really is a more complete version of a slide that we had in the last video. In modern C++.
the argument can be moved if it is an rvalue, and also the type must be movable.
This requires that the class has a move constructor, and all the C++ library types were rewritten in
C++11 to give them a move constructor and move assignment operator. Of course, being C++.
there have to be some exceptions and they are actually both to do with multi threading.
If the type doesn't have a move constructor or we pass an lvalue to the function, then the argument
will be copied.
So if we have old code, that's going to work exactly the same way as it did before.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding.